# siwick-website

-   [Overview](#overview)
-   [The website source](#the-website-source)
-   [Updating pages](#updating-pages)
    -   [Updating the front page](#updating-the-front-page)
    -   [Updating the People page](#updating-the-people-page)
    -   [Updating static content](#updating-static-content)
    -   [Updating images](#updating-images)
    -   [What cannot be easily changed](#what-cannot-be-easily-changed)
-   [Usage of `siwick-website`](#usage-of-siwick-website)
    -   [Installation of the Haskell toolchain (including `cabal`).](#installation-of-the-haskell-toolchain-including-cabal.)
-   [Deployment](#deployment)

## Overview

The Siwick research group website is a website generated by a program,
called `siwick-website`. T.his program does a few things, but most
importantly, it translates Markdown files (easy to write by hand) to
HTML (**not** easy to write by hand).

## The website source

The source material for the web pages are located in a few directories:

-   `static/`: Markdown files corresponding to web pages which don't
    change often;
-   `people/`: Markdown files corresponding to people within the Siwick
    research group, past and present;
    -   `poeple/students/`: Files for students/postdocs currently in the
        group;
    -   `poeple/alumni/`: Files for students/postdocs that are no longer
        in the group;
-   `images/` and `vector_images/`: Image files;

There are also some helper files for the `siwick-website` program:

-   `templates/`: Templates are HTML files which control the appearance
    of the website;
-   `css/` and `sass/`: Styling for the website;
-   `js/`: Small Javascript file to have an interactive navigation bar.

The `siwick-website` program takes files from the above directories and
produces a website in the directory `_rendered/`, which is not tracked
by `git`.

## Updating pages

### Updating the front page

While most content handled by `siwick-website` is in the Markdown
format, the front page `static/index.html` is a mix of HTML and Markdown
to allow for easier layout control.

### Updating the People page

The people page is special because it is autogenerated based on the
files in `people/`.

#### Adding a new student

Adding a new student is as simple as adding a new Markdown file to the
`people/student/` directory. The file should looks like so:

``` markdown
---
name: Alice Bob
position: Ph.D. Student
email: alice.bob@mail.mcgill.ca
phone: 514 398 3455
office: Otto Maass Chemistry Building, room 025
picture: /images/profiles/Alice.jpg
homepage: http://alicebob.com 
---

Alice has been performing some experiments on XYZ 
```

The `position` field **must be** one of the following choices:
`Postdoc`, `Ph.D. Student`, `M.Sc. Student`, `Undergraduate` or
`International`. The `picture` and `homepage` fields are **optional**.

#### Adding a new alumni

Once people leave the group, their associated Markdown file can be moved
to `poeple/alumni`. The file must be updated to look like so:

``` markdown
---
name: Alice Bob
degree: Ph.D. 2022
email: laurent.renedecotret@mail.mcgill.ca
date: 2022-06-15
picture: /images/profiles/Alice.jpg
---
```

### Updating static content

Apart from the People page, most other pages are Markdown files
converted to HTML. [The syntax for Markdown is described
here](https://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/syntax).

Static pages have metadata at the top. At this time, the following
metadata is available:

-   title (required): title of the page. This title will appear in the
    top banner.
-   withtoc (optional): if `withtoc: yes`, a table of content will be
    automatically inserted at the top of the page.
-   tocdepth (optional): Table of content depth. For example, if
    `tocdepth: 2`, level 1 and level 2 headings are taken into account
    in the generation of the table of content.

Example:

Here's an example:

``` markdown
---
title: Test Page
withtoc: yes
tocdepth: 4
---

# This is a new page
```

### Updating images

Images must be stored in the `images/` and `vector_images/` directories.
Subdirectories, like `images/profiles/`, are also supported. There are
two cases:

-   JPEG images (`*.jpg` and `*.jpeg`) are compressed automatically;
-   Non-JPEG images are copied as-is.

Using JPEGs as much as possible allows for the `siwick-website` program
to compress the website. Try to use them as much as possible for
pictures.

### What cannot be easily changed

For ease of use, the `siwick-website` compiler forces certain things to
stay the same. These are:

-   The overall page template cannot be changed. This includes
    navigation bar, top banners, and page footer. `siwick-website` will
    generate the layout `templates/default.html` automatically, and all
    changes to it will be overwritten;
-   The website schema, or website map. Navigation links (visible in the
    navigation bar) are generated by the compiler. New webpages can
    always be added (in the `static/` directory) but these webpages
    cannot be linked from the navigation bar unless the compiler source
    code is changed;

Changing the things above requires modification of the `siwick-website`
source code in `compiler/`.

## Usage of `siwick-website`

The `siwick-website` program is a Haskell program most easily compiled
by the `cabal` tool (More on this later). The steps to use the
`siwick-website` program are as follows.

1.  Build and install the program using `cabal build`:

``` sh
cabal install
```

2.  Run the program:

``` sh
cabal run siwick-website -- rebuild
```

3.  Check that all HTML links are valid:

``` sh
cabal run siwick-website -- check
```

or, for links within the website itself only (much faster):

``` sh
cabal run siwick-website -- check --internal-links
```

### Installation of the Haskell toolchain (including `cabal`).

It is recommended to install and manage the Haskell toolchain using
[`ghcup`](https://www.haskell.org/ghcup/#). Once this is installed:

``` sh
ghcup install cabal
ghcup install ghc
```

## Deployment

Once the website is built, i.e. all the HTML files and other supporting
files have been compiled into `_rendered/`, the directory `_rendered/`
needs to be deployed onto the McGill Physics department servers. This is
done using the `deploy.py` script.

To use `deploy.py`, you need: \* Python 3.7+; \* paramiko; \* tqdm;

You can install the dependencies `paramiko` and `tqdm` via the
`requirements.txt` file:

``` sh
python -m pip install tqdm
python -m pip install paramiko
```

Finally, to deploy the website:

``` sh
python deploy.py
```
